# Module 15: Packaging JavaScript for Production Deployment

Wherever a path to a file starts with *[Repository Root]*, replace it with the absolute path to the folder in which the 20480 repository resides. For example, if you cloned or extracted the 20480 repository to **C:\Users\John Doe\Downloads\20480**, change the path: **[Repository Root]\AllFiles\20480C\Mod01** to **C:\Users\John Doe\Downloads\20480\AllFiles\20480C\Mod01**.

# Lab: Setting Up Webpack Bundle for Production

### Lab Setup

### Preparation Steps

1.	Ensure that you have cloned the 20480C directory from GitHub. It contains the code segments for the labs and demos in this course. (**https://github.com/MicrosoftLearning/20480-Programming-in-HTML5-with-JavaScript-and-CSS3/tree/master/Allfiles**)

### Exercise 1: Creating a Deploy Package Using webpack

#### Task 1: Install and configure Babel and webpack

1.	Open Microsoft Visual Studio 2017.
2.	In Microsoft Visual Studio, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then click **Project/Solution**.
3.	In the **Open Project** dialog box, browse to **[Repository Root]\Allfiles\Mod15\Labfiles\Starter**, click **ContosoConf.sln**, and then click **Open**.

>**Note**: If **Security Warning for ContosoConf** dialog box appears clear **Ask me for every project in this solution** and then click **OK**.

4.	In ContosoConf - Microsoft Visual Studio, on the **Project** menu, right-click **Add New Item**.
5.	In the **Add New Item – ContosoConf** dialog box, click **npm Configuration File**.
6.	In the **Name** box, type **package.json**.
7.	Click **Add**.
8.  Open the command prompt and navigate to the project folder.
9.  To install **babel-core**, **babel-loader**, **babel-preset-es2015**, and **webpack**, run the following command at the command prompt:
   ```bash
        npm install babel-core babel-loader babel-preset-es2015 webpack --save-dev
   ```
10. In ContosoConf - Microsoft Visual Studio, on the **Project** menu, right-click **Add New Item**.
11. In the **Add New Item – Solution Items** dialog box, click **JavaScript File**.
12. In the **Name** box, type **webpack.config.js**.
13. Click **Add**.
14. In the **webpack.config.js** file, to store the **page** and **webpack** packages into variables, use **require**.
   ```javascript
        var path = require('path');
        var webpack = require('webpack');
   ```
15. To configure the **module.exports** object with the **entry** object that includes an entry for every JavaScript file that was imported into the html file, use the following code:
   ```javascript

        module.exports = {
            entry: {
                video: './scripts/pages/video.js',
                feedback: './scripts/pages/feedback.js',
                live: './scripts/pages/live.js',
                location: './scripts/pages/location.js',
                locationVenue: './scripts/pages/location-venue.js',
                register: './scripts/pages/register.js',
                schedule: './scripts/pages/schedule.js',
                speakerBadge: './scripts/pages/speaker-badge.js',
                offline: './scripts/offline.js'
            },
        }
   ```
16. Add the **output** object to **module.exports**, configure the **path** property to indicate where to save the **bundle** files, the **filename** property with the **name** placeholder, and **publicPath** with the **dist** value.
   ```javascript
   
        output: {
            path: path.resolve(__dirname,'dist'),
            filename: '[name].bundle.js',
            publicPath: '/dist/'
        },
   ```
17. Add the **module** object to **module.exports**. Inside the object, add the **rules** array with the **babel-loader** configuration object.
   ```javascript

        module: {
            rules: [
                {
                    test: /\.js$/,
                    loader: 'babel-loader',
                    query: {
                        presets: ['es2015']
                    }
                }
            ]
        },
   ```
18. To **module.exports**, add the **stats**, **devtool**, and **mode** objects.
   ```javascript

        stats: {
            colors: true
        },
        devtool: 'source-map',
        mode: 'production'
   ```

#### Task 2: Create bundle files and replace JavaScript

1.  In the Command Prompt window, run the following command.
   ```bash
        npm run webpack
   ```
2.  For every html file, replace all **script src** to load the new bundle files from the **dist** folder. For example:
   ```html
        <script src="/dist/video.bundle.js" type="module"></script>
   ```
3.  Run the application. The application should work as before and support older versions of Internet Explorer.

>**Results**: After completing this exercise, you will have a new **bundle.js** file which supports ECMAScript 5 for older browsers.


©2018 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the  [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode), additional terms may apply. All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are  **not**  included within the Creative Commons license grant. This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided &quot;as-is.&quot; Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.
