# Module 4: Creating Forms to Collect and Validate User Input

Wherever a path to a file starts with *[Repository Root]*, replace it with the absolute path to the folder in which the 20480 repository resides. For example, if you cloned or extracted the 20480 repository to **C:\Users\John Doe\Downloads\20480**, change the path: **[Repository Root]\AllFiles\20480C\Mod01** to **C:\Users\John Doe\Downloads\20480\AllFiles\20480C\Mod01**.

# Lab: Exploring the Contoso Conference Application

# Lab: Creating a Form and Validating User Input

### Lab Setup

### Preparation Steps

Ensure that you have cloned the 20480C directory from GitHub (**https://github.com/MicrosoftLearning/20480-Programming-in-HTML5-with-JavaScript-and-CSS3/tree/master/Allfiles**). It contains the code segments for the labs and demos in this course.

### Exercise 1: Creating a Form and Validating User Input by Using HTML5 Attributes

#### Task 1: Modify the Register page

1.	Open Microsoft Visual Studio 2017.
2.	In Microsoft Visual Studio, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then click **Project/Solution**.
3.	In the **Open Project** dialog box, go to **[Repository Root]\Allfiles\Mod04\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 1**, click **ContosoConf.sln**, and then click **Open**.
>**Note**: If **Security Warning for ContosoConf** dialog box appears, clear **Ask me for every project in this solution** checkbox and then click **OK**.
4.	In **Solution Explorer**, expand the **ContosoConf** project, and then double-click **register.htm**.
5.	Find and review the comment that starts with the following text:
   ```html
        TODO: Add form inputs
   ```
6.	In the **&lt;head&gt;** element, verify that the following HTML markup is present:
   ```html
        <link href="/styles/pages/register.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
   ```
7.	Before the **&lt;/body&gt;** tag near the end of the file, verify that the following HTML markup is present:
   ```html
        <script src="/scripts/pages/register.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
   ```

#### Task 2: Add form inputs to the Register page

1.	In the **register.htm** file, delete the following HTML markup:
   ```html
        <!-- Use the following template for the inputs -->
        <div class="field">
            <label for="{input-id}">label:</label>
            <input type="{type}" id="{input-id}" name="{input-name}" />
        </div>
   ```
2.	In place of the code you deleted in step 1, add the following HTML markup:
   ```html
        <div class="field">
            <label for="first-name">First name:</label>
            <input type="text" id="first-name" name="FirstName" />
        </div>
        <div class="field">
            <label for="last-name">Last name:</label>
            <input type="text" id="last-name" name="LastName" />
        </div>
        <div class="field">
            <label for="email-address">Email address:</label>
            <input type="email" id="email-address" name="EmailAddress" />
        </div>
        <div class="field">
            <label for="password">Choose a password:</label>
            <input type="password" id="password" name="Password" />
        </div>
        <div class="field">
            <label for="confirm-password">Confirm your password:</label>
            <input type="password" id="confirm-password" name="ConfirmPassword" />
        </div>
        <div class="field">
            <label for="website">Website/blog:</label>
            <input type="url" id="website" name="WebsiteUrl" />
        </div>
   ```
3.	On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
4.	In Microsoft Edge, if the **Intranet settings are turned off by default** message appears, click **Don’t show this message again**.
5.	In the **First name** box, type **Josh**.
6.	In the **Last name** box, type **Bailey**.
7.	In the **Email address** box, type **josh.bailey@adatum.com**.
8.	In the **Choose a password** box, type **Passw0rd**.
9.	In the **Confirm your password** box, type **Passw0rd**.
10.	In the **Website/blog** box, type **http://adatum.com/**.
11.	Click **Register**.
12.	Verify that the application displays the **Thanks for registering** page.
13.	To return to the **Register** page, in the page header, click the **Register** link.
14.	Leave the boxes empty, and then click **Register**.
15.	Verify that the application displays the following messages:
   ```html
        Invalid registration information

        The FirstName field is required.
        The LastName field is required.
        The EmailAddress field is required.
        The Password field is required.
        The ConfirmPassword field is required.
   ```
16.	Close Microsoft Edge.

#### Task 3: Make the form more user-friendly.

1.	In ContosoConf - Microsoft Visual Studio, in **Solution Explorer**, double-click **register.htm**.
2.	Find the line containing the following HTML markup:
   ```html
        <input type="text" id="first-name" name="FirstName" />
   ```
3.	Add the **autofocus** attribute as shown below:
   ```html
        <input type="text" id="first-name" name="FirstName" autofocus="autofocus" />
   ```
4.	Find the line containing the following HTML markup:
   ```html
        <input type="url" id="website" name="WebsiteUrl" />
   ```
5.	Add the placeholder attribute as shown below:
   ```html
        <input type="url" id="website" name="WebsiteUrl" placeholder="http://" />
   ```
6.	On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
7.	In Microsoft Edge, verify that the cursor is placed in the **First name** box.
8.	Verify that the **Website/blog** box has **http://** as the placeholder text.
9.	Close Microsoft Edge.

#### Task 4: Check for missing mandatory data

1.	In **Solution Explorer**, double-click **register.htm**.
2.	Find the line containing the following HTML markup:
   ```html
        <input type="text" id="first-name" name="FirstName" autofocus="autofocus" />
   ```
3.	Add the **required** attribute as shown below:
   ```html
        <input type="text" id="first-name" name="FirstName" required="required" autofocus="autofocus" />
   ```
4.	Find the line containing the following HTML markup:
   ```html
        <input type="text" id="last-name" name="LastName" />
   ```
5.	Add the **required** attribute as shown below:
   ```html
        <input type="text" id="last-name" name="LastName" required="required" />
   ```
6.	Find the line containing the following HTML markup:
   ```html
        <input type="email" id="email-address" name="EmailAddress" />
   ```
7.	Add the **required** attribute as shown below:
   ```html
        <input type="email" id="email-address" name="EmailAddress" required="required" />
   ```
8.	Find the line containing the following HTML markup:
   ```html
        <input type="password" id="password" name="Password" />
   ```
9.	Add the **required** attribute as shown below:
   ```html
        <input type="password" id="password" name="Password" required="required" />
   ```
10.	Find the line containing the following HTML markup:
   ```html
        <input type="password" id="confirm-password" name="ConfirmPassword" />
   ```
11.	Add the **required** attribute as shown below:
   ```html
        <input type="password" id="confirm-password" name="ConfirmPassword" required="required" />
   ```
12.	On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
13.	In Microsoft Edge, click **Register** without entering any data.
14.	Verify that the application highlights each mandatory box and that the form displays the following error message:
   ```html
        This is a required field
   ```
15.	In the **First name** box, type **Josh**.
16.	In the **Last name** box, type **Bailey**.
17.	In the **Email address** box, type **josh.bailey@adatum.com**.
18.	In the **Choose a password** box, type **Passw0rd**.
19.	In the **Confirm your password** box, type **Passw0rd**.
20.	In the **Website/blog** box, type **http://adatum.com/**.
21.	Click **Register** and verify that the **Thanks for registering** page appears.
22.	Close Microsoft Edge.

#### Task 5: Add password complexity validation

1.	In **Solution Explorer**, double-click **register.htm**.
2.	Find the line containing the following HTML markup:
   ```html
        <input type="password" id="password" name="Password" required="required"  />
   ```
3.	Add the **pattern** and **title** attributes as shown below:
   ```html
        <input type="password" id="password" name="Password" required="required" pattern="[a-zA-Z0-9]{5,}" title="At least 5 letters and numbers" />
   ```
4.	On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
5.	In Microsoft Edge, in the **First name** box, type **Josh**.
6.	In the **Last name** box, type **Bailey**.
7.	In the **Email address** box, type **josh.bailey@adatum.com**.
8.	In the **Choose a password** box, type **abc**.
9.	In the **Confirm your password** box, type **abc**.
10.	Click **Register**.
11.	Verify that the **Choose a password** box displays the following error message:
   ```html
        You must use this format: At least 5 letters and numbers
   ```
12.	In the **Choose a password** box, type **Passw0rd**.
13.	In the **Confirm your password** box, type **Passw0rd**.
14.	In the **Website/blog** box, type **http://adatum.com/**.
15.	Click **Register** and verify that the **Thanks for registering** page appears.
16.	Close Microsoft Edge.

>**Results:** After completing this exercise, you will have modified the attendee registration page to validate the data entered by attendees.

### Exercise 2: Validating User Input by Using JavaScript

#### Task 1: Write code to get the contents of the password input elements

1.	In ContosoConf - Microsoft Visual Studio, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then click **Project/Solution**.
2.	In the **Open Project** dialog box, go to **[Repository Root]\Allfiles\Mod04\Labfiles\Start\Exercise 2**, click **ContosoConf.sln**, and then click **Open**.
>**Note**: If **Security Warning for ContosoConf** dialog box appears, clear **Ask me for every project in this solution** checkbox and then click **OK**.
3.	In **Solution Explorer**, expand the **ContosoConf** project, expand the **scripts** folder, and then expand the **pages** folder.
4.	Double-click **register.js**.
5.	Find the following comment:
   ```javascript
        // TODO: Task 1 - Get the password <input> elements from the DOM by ID
   ```
6.	After the comment, add the following JavaScript code:
   ```javascript
        var passwordInput = document.getElementById("password");
        var confirmPasswordInput = document.getElementById("confirm-password");
   ```

#### Task 2: Write code to compare the **Password** and **Confirm Password** inputs

1.	In the **register.js** file, find the line containing the following comment:
   ```javascript
        // TODO: Task 2 - Compare passwordInput value to confirmPasswordInput value
   ```
2.	After the comment, add the following JavaScript code:
   ```javascript
        var passwordsMatch = passwordInput.value === confirmPasswordInput.value;
   ```

#### Task 3: Write code to display a custom error message if the passwords differ

1.	In the **register.js** file, find the comment that starts with the following text:
   ```javascript
        // TODO: Task 3
   ```
2.	After this comment, add the following JavaScript code:
   ```javascript
        if (passwordsMatch) {
            // Clear any previous error message.
            confirmPasswordInput.setCustomValidity("");
        } else {
            // Setting this error message will prevent the submission of the form.
            confirmPasswordInput.setCustomValidity("Your passwords don't match. Please type the same password again.");
        }
   ```

#### Task 4: Add input event listeners to the inputs to call the checkPasswords method

1.	In the **register.js** file, find the comment that starts with the following text:
   ```javascript
        // TODO: Task 4
   ```
2.	After the comment, add the following JavaScript code:
   ```javascript
        passwordInput.addEventListener("input", checkPasswords, false);
        confirmPasswordInput.addEventListener("input", checkPasswords, false);
   ```
3.	In **Solution Explorer**, double-click **register.htm**.
4.	On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
5.  In Microsoft Edge, in the **First name** box, type **Josh**.
6.  In the **Last name** box, type **Bailey**.
7.  In the **Email address** box, type **josh.bailey\@adatum.com**.
8.  In the **Choose a password** box, type **abc123**.
9.  In the **Confirm your password** box, type **abc456**.
10.  Click **Register**.
11.  Verify that the **Confirm your password** box displays the following error
message:
   ```html
       Your passwords don't match. Please type the same password again.
   ```
12.  In the **Confirm your password** box, type **abc123**.
13.  Click **Register**, and verify that the **Thanks for registering** page appears.
14.  Close Microsoft Edge.

#### Task 5: Style elements that are not valid

1.	In **Solution Explorer**, in the **ContosoConf** project, expand the **styles** folder, and then expand the **pages** folder.
2.	Double-click **register.css**.
3.	Find the comment that starts with the following text:
   ```css
        /* TODO: Task 5
   ```
4.	Below the comment, add the following style:
   ```css
        .register form.submission-attempted input:invalid {
            background-color: #f9b2b2;
            outline: none;
        }
   ```
5.  In **Solution Explorer**, double-click **register.htm**.
6.  On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
7.  In Microsoft Edge, click **Register**.
8.  Verify that the application highlights the **First name**, **Last name**, **Email address**, **Choose a password**, and **Confirm your password** boxes with colored backgrounds.
9.  Close Microsoft Edge.
10. Close all open windows.

>**Results:** After completing this exercise, you will have modified the registration page to validate password inputs.

©2018 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the  [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode), additional terms may apply. All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are  **not**  included within the Creative Commons license grant. This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided &quot;as-is.&quot; Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.
