# Module 5: Communicating with a Remote Server

Wherever a path to a file starts with *[Repository Root]*, replace it with the absolute path to the folder in which the 20480 repository resides. For example, if you cloned or extracted the 20480 repository to **C:\Users\John Doe\Downloads\20480**, change the path: **[Repository Root]\AllFiles\20480C\Mod01** to **C:\Users\John Doe\Downloads\20480\AllFiles\20480C\Mod01**.

# Lab: Communicating with a Remote Data Source
### Lab Setup

### Preparation Steps

Ensure that you have cloned the 20480C directory from GitHub (**https://github.com/MicrosoftLearning/20480-Programming-in-HTML5-with-JavaScript-and-CSS3/tree/master/Allfiles**). It contains the code segments for the labs and demos in this course.

### Exercise 1: Retrieving Data

#### Task 1: Review the Schedule page

1.	Open Microsoft Visual Studio 2017.
2.	In Microsoft Visual Studio, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then select **Project/Solution**.
3.	In the **Open Project** dialog box, browse to **[Repository Root]\Allfiles\Mod05\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 1**, click **ContosoConf.sln**, and then click **Open**.
>**Note**: If **Security Warning for ContosoConf** dialog box appears, clear **Ask me for every project in this solution** checkbox and then click **OK**.
4.	In **Solution Explorer**, expand the **ContosoConf** project, expand the **scripts** folder, and then expand the **pages** folder. 
5.	Double-click **schedule.js**.
6.	Verify that the first line of the file now contains the following JavaScript code:
    ```javascript
        let schedule = [];
    ```
7.	Verify that the **createSessionElement** function contains the following JavaScript code:
    ```javascript
        function createSessionElement(session) {
            const li = document.createElement("li");

            li.sessionId = session.id;

            const star = document.createElement("a");
            star.setAttribute("href", "#");
            star.setAttribute("class", "star");
            li.appendChild(star);

            const title = document.createElement("span");
            title.textContent = session.title;
            li.appendChild(title);

            return li;
        };
    ```

#### Task 2: Create the downloadSchedule function

1.	In the **schedule.js** file, find the comment that starts with the following text:
    ```javascript
        // TODO: Create a function called downloadSchedule
    ```
2.	After the last line of this comment, add the following JavaScript code:
    ```javascript
        function downloadSchedule() {
            const request = new XMLHttpRequest();
        }
    ```
3.	In the **schedule.js** file, after the previous statement in the **downloadSchedule** function, add the following JavaScript code: 
    ```javascript
        request.open("GET", "/schedule/list", true);
        request.onreadystatechange = function () {
            if (request.readyState === 4) {
                const response = JSON.parse(request.responseText);
                response.schedule.forEach(function (element) {
                    schedule.push(element);
                });
                displaySchedule();
            }
        };
        request.send();
    ```
4.	Add the following statement to the end of the **schedule.js** file: 
    ```javascript
        downloadSchedule();
    ```

#### Task 3: Add error handling to the downloadSchedule function

In the **schedule.js** file, add the following code shown in bold to the **downloadSchedule** function:
  ```javascript
        function downloadSchedule() {
            const request = new XMLHttpRequest();
            request.open("GET", "/schedule/list", true);
            request.onreadystatechange = function () {
                if (request.readyState === 4) {
                    try {
                        const response = JSON.parse(request.responseText);
                        if (request.status === 200) {
                            response.schedule.forEach(function (element) {
								schedule.push(element);
							});
                            displaySchedule();
                        } else {
                            alert(response.message);
                        }
                    } catch (exception) {
                        alert("Schedule list not available.");
                    }
                }
            };
            request.send();
        }
  ```

#### Task 4: Test the Schedule page

1.	In **Solution Explorer**, double-click **schedule.htm**.
2.	On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
3.	In Microsoft Edge, if the **Intranet settings are turned off by default** message appears, click **Don’t show this message again**.
4.	Verify that the page displays a list of conference sessions.
5.	Close Microsoft Edge.
6.	In ContosoConf - Microsoft Visual Studio, double-click the **schedule.js** file.
7.	In the **downloadSchedule** function, find the following statement:
    ```javascript
        request.open("GET", "/schedule/list", true);
    ```
8.	Change the URL in this statement as shown in the following code:
    ```javascript
        request.open("GET", "/schedule/list?fail", true);
    ```
9.	On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
10. In Microsoft Edge, in the navigation bar, click **Schedule**.
11. Verify that the **Service currently unavailable** message appears.
12. In the **Message from webpage** dialog box, click **OK**.
13. Close Microsoft Edge.
14. In ContosoConf - Microsoft Visual Studio, in **Solution Explorer**, double-click the **schedule.js** file.
15. In the **downloadSchedule** function, change the string **/schedule/list?fail** back to **/schedule/list**.
16. On the **File** menu, click **Save All**.

>**Results**: After completing this exercise, you will have modified the code for the **Schedule** page to display the list of sessions retrieved from a web service, and to handle errors that can occur when communicating with a remote service.

### Exercise 2: Serializing and Transmitting Data

#### Task 1: Send the request to indicate the session that an attendee has selected

1.	In ContosoConf - Microsoft Visual Studio, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then select **Project/Solution**.
2.	In the **Open Project** dialog box, browse to **[Repository Root]\Allfiles\Mod05\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 2**, click **ContosoConf.sln**, and then click **Open**.
>**Note**: If **Security Warning for ContosoConf** dialog box appears, clear **Ask me for every project in this solution** checkbox and then click **OK**.
3.	In **Solution Explorer**, expand the **ContosoConf** project, expand the **scripts** folder, and then expand the **pages** folder.
4.	Double-click **schedule.js**.
5.	Find the following function:
    ```javascript
        function saveStar(sessionId, isStarred) {
    ```
6.	After the last line of the **TODO** comment in the body of this function, add the following JavaScript code:
    ```javascript
        const request = new XMLHttpRequest();
        request.open("POST", "/schedule/star/" + sessionId, true);
    ```
7.	To the end of the **saveStar** function, add the following JavaScript code:
    ```javascript
	 request.setRequestHeader("Content-Type", "application/x-www-form-urlencoded");
	 const data = "starred=" + isStarred;
	 request.send(data);
    ```

#### Task 2: Handle the web service response

1.	In the **schedule.js** file, find the following line of code in the **saveStar** function:
    ```javascript
        request.open("POST", "/schedule/star/" + sessionId, true);
    ```
2.	After this statement, add the following JavaScript code:
    ```javascript
        if (isStarred) {
            request.onreadystatechange = function() {
                if (request.readyState === 4 && request.status === 200) {
                    const response = JSON.parse(request.responseText);
                    if (response.starCount > 50) {
                        alert("This session is very popular! Be sure to arrive early to get a       seat.");
                    }
                }
            };
        }
    ```

#### Task 3: Test the Schedule page

1.	In **Solution Explorer**, double-click **schedule.htm**.
2.	On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
3.	In Microsoft Edge, click the star next to **New Technologies in Enterprise**.
4.	Verify that the following message alert is displayed:
    ```javascript
        This session is very popular! Be sure to arrive early to get a seat.
    ```
5.	In the **Message from webpage** dialog box, click **OK**.
6.	Click the star next to **Diving in at the deep end with Canvas**.
7.	Verify that no message alert is displayed.
8.	Close Microsoft Edge.

>**Results**: After completing this exercise, you will have updated the **Schedule** page to send attendee selections to a web service, and to display a message when a session is popular.


### Exercise 3: Refactoring the Code by Using the async await fetch Method.

#### Task 1: Refactor the downloadSchedule function

1.	In ContosoConf - Microsoft Visual Studio, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then select **Project/Solution**.
2.	In the **Open Project** dialog box, browse to **[Repository Root]\Allfiles\Mod05\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 3**, click **ContosoConf.sln**, and then click **Open**.
>**Note**: If **Security Warning for ContosoConf** dialog box appears, clear **Ask me for every project in this solution** checkbox and then click **OK**.
3.	In Solution Explorer, expand the **scripts** folder, expand the **pages** folder, and then double-click **schedule.js**.
4.	In the **schedule.js** file, replace the **downloadSchedule** function with the following JavaScript code:
	 ```javascript
		const downloadSchedule = async () => {
			   // await response of fetch call
			   let response = await fetch("/schedule/list");

			   // checking response is ok
			   if (response.ok) {
				   // transform body to json
				   let data = await response.json();
				   schedules = data.schedule;
				   displaySchedule();
			   }
			   else
				   alert("Schedule list not available.");
		}
	 ```
#### Task 2: Refactor the saveStar function

 In the **schedule.js** file, replace the **saveStar** function with the following JavaScript code:
   ```javascript
	const saveStar = async (sessionId, isStarred) => {

		const headers = new Headers({
			"Content-Type": "application/x-www-form-urlencoded"
		})


		const options = {
			method: 'POST',
			headers: headers,
			body: "starred=" + isStarred
		}

		const response = await fetch("/schedule/star/" + sessionId, options);

		if (isStarred) {
			if (response.ok) {
				const data = await response.json();
				if (data.starCount > 50)
					alert("This session is very popular! Be sure to arrive early to get a seat.");
			}
		}
	}
   ```

#### Task 3: Test the Schedule page

1.	In **Solution Explorer**, double-click **schedule.htm**.
2.	On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
3.	In Microsoft Edge, verify that the page displays the list of conference sessions.
4.	Click the star icon next to **New Technologies in Enterprise**.
5.	Verify that the following message alert is displayed:
    ```javascript
        This session is very popular! Be sure to arrive early to get a seat.
    ```
6.	In the **Message from webpage** dialog box, click **OK**.
7.	Click the star icon next to **Diving in at the deep end with Canvas**.
8.	Verify that no message alert is displayed.
9.	Close Microsoft Edge.
10. In Visual Studio, in **Solution Explorer**, double-click **schedule.js**.
11. In the **downloadSchedule** function, find the string **/schedule/list** and replace it with **/schedule/list?fail**.
12. In **Solution Explorer**, double-click **schedule.htm**.
13. On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
14. Verify that the **Schedule list not available** error message is displayed.
15. In the **Message from webpage** dialog box, click **OK**.
16. Close Microsoft Edge.

>**Results**: After completing this exercise, you will have refactored the JavaScript code that sends and receives data to use the jQuery **ajax** method.


©2018 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the  [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode), additional terms may apply. All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are  **not**  included within the Creative Commons license grant. This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided &quot;as-is.&quot; Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.
