# Module 3: Introduction to JavaScript
Wherever a path to a file starts with *[Repository Root]*, replace it with the absolute path to the folder in which the 20480 repository resides. For example, if you cloned or extracted the 20480 repository to **C:\Users\John Doe\Downloads\20480**, change the path: **[Repository Root]\AllFiles\20480C\Mod01** to **C:\Users\John Doe\Downloads\20480\AllFiles\20480C\Mod01**.

# Lab: Displaying Data and Handling Events by Using JavaScript

### Lab Setup

### Preparation Steps

Ensure that you have cloned the 20480C directory from GitHub (** https://github.com/MicrosoftLearning/20480-Programming-in-HTML5-with-JavaScript-and-CSS3/tree/master/Allfiles**). It contains the code segments for the labs and demos in this course.

### Exercise 1: Displaying Data Programmatically

#### Task 1: Review the existing code for the Schedule page
 
1.	Start Microsoft Visual Studio 2017.
2.	In Microsoft Visual Studio, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then click **Project/Solution**.
3.	In the **Open Project** dialog box, browse to the **[Repository Root]\Allfiles\Mod03\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 1** folder, click **ContosoConf.sln**, and then click **Open**.
>**Note**: If **Security Warning for ContosoConf** dialog box appears, clear **Ask me for every project in this solution** checkbox and then click **OK**.
4.	In Solution Explorer, expand the **ContosoConf** project node, and then double-click **schedule.htm**.
5.	Review the contents of the **schedule.htm** file and verify that the **schedule** page section contains the following markup:
    ```html
        <section class="page-section schedule">
            <div class="container">
                <h1>Schedule</h1>
                <ul id="schedule"></ul>
            </div>
        </section>
    ```
6.	Verify that the file contains the following HTML markup towards the end:
    ```html
        <script src="/scripts/pages/schedule.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
    ```
7.	In Solution Explorer, expand the **scripts** folder.
8.	Expand the **pages** sub-folder.
9.	Double-click **schedule.js**.
10.	Review the contents of the **schedule.js** file and verify that the first few lines contain the following code:
    ```javascript
        const schedule = [ 
            {
                "id": "session-1",
                "title": "Registration",
                "tracks": [1, 2]
            },
            {
                "id": "session-2",
                "title": "Moving the Web forward with HTML5",
                "tracks": [1, 2]
            },
            {
                "id": "session-3",
                "title": "Diving in at the deep end with Canvas",
                "tracks": [1]
            },
            {
                "id": "session-4",
                "title": "New Technologies in Enterprise",
                "tracks": [2]
            },
            ...
        ];
    ```

#### Task 2: Write code to get the schedule list element on the Schedule page

1.	In Solution Explorer, double-click **schedule.js**.
2.	After the line containing the **TODO: Task 2** comment, add the following line of JavaScript:
    ```javascript
        const list = document.getElementById("schedule");
    ```

#### Task 3: Implement the createSessionElement function that creates the list item for a session

1.	In **schedule.js**, after the line containing the **TODO: Task 3** comment, add the following JavaScript code:
    ```javascript
        const li = document.createElement("li");
        li.textContent = session.title;
        return li;
    ```

#### Task 4: Implement the displaySchedule function that adds session items to the list for display

1.	In **schedule.js**, after the line containing the **TODO: Task 4** comment, add the following JavaScript code:
    ```javascript
        for (let i = 0; i < schedule.length; i++) {
            const li = createSessionElement(schedule[i]);
            list.appendChild(li);
        }
    ```

#### Task 5: Run the web application and view the Schedule page

1.	In Solution Explorer, double-click **schedule.htm**.
2.	On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
3.	In Microsoft Edge, if the message, "Intranet settings are turned off by default," appears, click **Don’t show this message again**.
4.	Verify that the list of sessions is displayed.
5.	Close Microsoft Edge.


>**Results**: After completing this exercise, you will have added the **Schedule** page, which displays the details of the conference sessions, to the ContosoConf application.

### Exercise 2: Handling Events

#### Task 1: Add check box HTML elements

1.	In ContosoConf - Visual Studio, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then click **Project/Solution**.
2.	In the **Open Project** dialog box, browse to **[Repository Root]\Allfiles\Mod03\Labfiles\Start\Exercise 2**, click **ContosoConf.sln**, and then click **Open**.
>**Note**: If **Security Warning for ContosoConf** dialog box appears, clear **Ask me for every project in this solution** checkbox and then click **OK**.
3.	In Solution Explorer, expand the **ContosoConf** project, and then double-click **schedule.htm**.
4.	Find the line containing the following HTML markup:
    ```html
        <ul id="schedule"></ul>
    ```
5.	Before this line, insert the following HTML markup:
Show:
    ```html
        <input type="checkbox" id="show-track-1" checked="checked"/><label      for="show-track-1">Track 1</label>
        <input type="checkbox" id="show-track-2" checked="checked"/><label      for="show-track-2">Track 2</label>
    ```

#### Task 2: Write code to get the check box elements from the Schedule page

1.	In Solution Explorer, expand the **scripts** folder, expand the **pages** sub-folder, and then double-click **schedule.js**.
2.	In **schedule.js**, find the line containing the following JavaScript code:
    ```javascript
        const list = document.getElementById("schedule");
    ```
3.	After this line, add the following JavaScript code:
    ```javascript
        const track1CheckBox = document.getElementById("show-track-1");
        const track2CheckBox = document.getElementById("show-track-2");
    ```

#### Task 3: Add click event listeners for each check box

1.	In **schedule.js**, add the following JavaScript code to the end of the file:
    ```javascript
        track1CheckBox.addEventListener("click", displaySchedule, false);
        track2CheckBox.addEventListener("click", displaySchedule, false);
    ```

#### Task 4: Update the displaySchedule function to display the sessions for selected tracks

1.	In the **schedule.js** file, in the **displaySchedule** function, replace the body of the **for** loop with the following JavaScript code:
    ```javascript
        const tracks = schedule[i].tracks;
        const isCurrentTrack = (track1CheckBox.checked && tracks.indexOf(1) >= 0) ||
                                (track2CheckBox.checked && tracks.indexOf(2) >= 0);
        if (isCurrentTrack) {
            const li = createSessionElement(schedule[i]);
            list.appendChild(li);
        }
    ```

#### Task 5: Run the web application and view the Schedule page

1.	In Solution Explorer, double-click **schedule.htm**.
2.	On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
3.	In Microsoft Edge, verify that both check boxes are selected and that the complete list of sessions is displayed.
4.	Clear **Track 1** and verify that only the sessions for **Track 2** appear.
5.	Select **Track 1**, clear **Track 2**, and then verify that only the sessions for Track 1 appear.
6.	Clear **Track 1** and verify that no sessions appear.
7.	Close Microsoft Edge.
6. Close all open windows.

>**Results**: After completing this exercise, you will have updated the **Schedule** page to filter sessions based on which tracks have been selected.

©2018 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode), additional terms may apply. All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are **not** included within the Creative Commons license grant. This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided &quot;as-is.&quot; Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.
